---
layout: post
title: Digital Humanities and Sociology
subtitle: Or, How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love Computational Methods; or, Sociology Jeremiad from a Novice
gh-repo: daattali/beautiful-jekyll
gh-badge: [star, fork, follow]
tags: [digital humanities],[sociology],[research methods]
comments: true
---

The first post on a new blog feels kind of like a big deal. I haven’t kept a blog in a very long time--long enough for those posts to be largely lost, or so I hope, with their host sites themselves now long defunct. Regardless, it strikes me that the appropriate way to begin is with something kind of, well, introductory. This blog is part of a digital humanities course project, so the introduction that seems most reasonable to me is a discussion of how I view the relationship between DH and my home discipline, sociology.

In my opinion, one of the most remarkable qualities of DH is that it doesn’t precisely exist as a static disciplinary site; instead, it encompasses a variety of multidirectional flows of knowledge and methods, from within and without the traditional humanities fields. As a sociologist, this is intriguing. There’s an almost ephemeral quality to it; if you look away for too long, you may look back to find it already changed. As a sociologist, I can also see how this might be… frustrating. 

As interdisciplinarity is increasingly championed by (often younger, more progressive) scholars, the scientific rigor of traditional disciplinary methods is necessarily, if sometimes implicitly, called into question. While we may not be the group to struggle most with this newfound(ish) uncertainty in our traditional methods, personal experience suggests that the struggle to accept this assertion among sociologists is, as the kids (used to?) say, real. In particular, as in so many other realms of society, we find that it is often some of our most senior, distinguished scholars who cannot face this challenge to their place in a field they’ve spent years working to make themselves the masters of.

Of course, it’s worth considering that is actually quite reasonable on some levels that many sociologists are particularly reticent about digital methods. Often, we find ourselves having to defend the validity of qualitative findings in an academic landscape that fetishizes statistics and the “hard” sciences. Much of the early establishment of sociology revolved around the work of (primarily white) men striving to give social science an appearance and approach that could bestow upon it equal value to the natural sciences (e.g. Durkheim's 1897 classic, [*Suicide*](https://archive.org/details/suicide0000unse_x5o7)). It only follows that there would be mass resistance to what many may hear as a call to abandon the methods we have spent years developing, refining, and defending, such as the in-depth interview. But there is no zero-sum approach to research methods, and there is a particularly frustrating irony to the apparent struggle we as sociologists have with binary thinking when it comes to this.

“Does it really matter if the older generation won’t come along?,” you might ask. Well, that depends. To answer that question, I think we have to pose a larger one: *In America, in 2020, does sociology matter?* There is no easy answer, of course, but I can’t resist posing the question. Questions are at the root of all scholarship; as people, I think that most of us find our way to the academy because we have more questions than there are currently answers. Sociologists, in particular, are often also guided by a sense of justice--not always, certainly, but anecdotally, it’s quite common. It should be natural for us to allow our curiosity and sense of justice to permeate all dimensions of our work, including our methodologies and their theoretical underpinnings. And many of us do, make no mistake! Laura Nelson's framework developed in "[Computational Grounded Theory](https://drive.google.com/file/d/0BxI6W5IIG74FeEtGbjQ0WF9uM0U/view)" (2017), for example, goes a long way toward demonstrating how sociologists can put these kinds of ideas into practice in our research. But there remain as many or more sociologists who would rather avoid questioning our foundations, and that sociology as an institution puts up resistance to this direction of interrogation suggests there’s something reasonable about acquiescing to a status quo condition--a notion that I find equal parts baffling and disheartening. 

However, this brings us to a more approachable question: what could be at stake for sociology if we don’t pay attention to the developments in digital humanities and other nearby fields? When we focus only on our own field of work and our own methods, we leave ourselves ignorant and our knowledge fragile. We stand to miss exciting discoveries, recoveries, and innovations made by researchers in other disciplines, who we could and *should* be working with. And if sociology as a discipline continues to hold digital methods and other innovations in research at arm’s length, it will continue to reproduce scholars who hold these antiquated and, frankly, elitist views. Further, these views aren’t just outdated and uncritical, though; they also have serious material consequences for the research we produce and how our findings are applied.

While quite different in tone than the argument being made here, Mike Savage and Roger Burrows raise some of these concerns in their 2007 article, “[The Coming Crisis in Empirical Sociology](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/The-Coming-Crisis-of-Empirical-Sociology-Savage-Burrows/b909936b4c3d5ca8be06887ae8780df325b6e154).” The crux of the authors’ argument is that, due to the relatively recent proliferation of social data and the growth of a commercial industry that conducts sociocultural research for marketing purposes, the traditional sociological methods of the sample survey and in-depth interview are becoming increasingly irrelevant means of conducting empirical sociological research. Though I disagree with the assertion that these and other qualitative or quant-lite methods retain no value (I would argue that our approach should be a methodological synthesis), I have to agree with the authors’ overall concern for the purpose and value of sociological research generally.  

Ultimately, I fear that if sociology cannot choose to value the contributions of our social science and humanities breathren from across the disciplinary spectrum--with particular attention to digital methods and the philosophies DH scholars are producing to help us understand how to best use them--it may not technically signal the end of sociology as such, but I can't help but believe that it signals the potential end of its social and political significance.

One of the brilliant things about digital methods is that they are and will continue to become more accessible to those outside the academy than traditional methods, and already the sophistication of research produced by marketing corporations and social media companies is outpacing what we are capable of from within our narrow paradigm, as Savage and Burrows point out. Promising scholars who want to do meaningful, community-engaged work will be driven away, whether that be to other fields or out of the academy altogether. If we want to avoid seeing these things unfold across sociology departments in the US, then embracing our relationships with digital humanities and nearby disciplines is critical.

It’s an unfortunate truth that sociology will most likely continue to struggle with internal and interdisciplinary debates about methodology and the possibilities/limitations of computational techniques, but that doesn’t mean that those of us entering the field now should consider ourselves limited by the conventions of our discipline. I, for one, am not ready to give up on sociology. My grandfather was a sociologist; it’s in my blood. I’ve tried more than once to escape, but it has a hold on me. I love this discipline and what I know it’s capable of, and it’s for that reason that I want to see it embrace new, creative, and critical approaches to how we conduct our research. As social scientists, we take great pride in seeing the way society functions at a level invisible to many, but that has often led us to the erroneous conclusion that we are seeing the whole picture. Perhaps a first necessary step is for us to accept the uncomfortable reality that this is likely to be impossible; there is no perspective from which we can see and understand every dimension, every flow of power, every relationship in society at the same time. Sociologists don’t like this idea, in my experience, and maybe it’s this that will prove to be our fatal flaw. However, if we accept the dense complexity of society--and we should, seeing as how often we find ourselves emphasizing it--then we can and should be willing to work across disciplinary boundaries to do the most thoughtful, critical research we can, regardless of whether our findings are the only ones possible or not.
